---
layout: post
title: "Dogfight!"
description: "Old school multiplayer arcade game development journey"
categories: elixir networking c game-development low-level
---

A couple of weeks ago, inspired by an as gripping as nerdy tv series (check out
[Halt and Catch
Fire](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Halt_and_Catch_Fire_(TV_series)) 🔥), I
explored a little idea, a small, self-contained low level project to build an
old arcade game - battletank arena - with a little kink in the form of a
centralized TCP server to handle multiplayer through the network.

An important note, I'm **not** a game developer, and don't have any significant
experience on it, best practices and patterns, the code and design in general
will likely be subpar to say the least, the aim is just having fun while
learning somthing.

The rules were simple

- Keep it small and simple to keep it fun
- Use the least amount of external dependencies as possible

I think I somewhat respected them as much as possible, not pedantically but in a
good measure. During the development I

- Developed a first simpler version using `ncurses` to handle the "GUI"
- Implemented some very dumb synchronization logic to keep FPS consistent between players
- An even dumber binary protocol to communicate, game state being the only payload exchanged
- A micro set of features (bullets, power ups, life points etc)

I then moved on and got intrigued by the possibility of extending the client side of the
game with a little more ambitious graphical layer, using `raylib`. The library is pretty
solid, small but powerful; I still kept most of the core feature-set as simple as possible,
in no particular order:

- Select server based with non-blocking sockets, no async libraries such as `UV` and the like
- The binary protocol exchanges the entire game state, while it's fine for the size is pretty
  contained, it would've been simple to evolve it to send delta updates
- All the controls are keyboard based, no oblique movements, acceleration
- No scaling/proper handling of the screen size of each client (nasty bugs are totally ignored)
- No optimizations of sort, not lag compensation, path prediction and other
  painful network management issues
- No sprite animations, bullet explosions and so on

All of the above are "easy" upgrades that could be tackled, what caught my
curiosity is, on paper, this kind of games are mostly heavily I/O based, the
heavy work is made on client side to render something eye-pleasing essentially,
how well would it work an highly scalable TCP server in another language
instead of C to manage the multiplayer stack, e.g. games, rooms, chats possibly
and so on. So I decided to give it a go in Elixir and port my
`battletank-server` to an elixir based implementation, which would make it
painless to distribute in a cluster and happily use all the resources of all
the nodes.

## Goals

Once again, simplicity and a small codebase are paramount here, the project
aims to be a variations on the previous iteration, hopefully with some
additions enabled by how convenient `elixir` is for network-based soft real-time
applications. There is no expectations or quality goals, it is intended to be
an exploratory and fun work.

Moreover, the development will be divided in the server side and the client
side, leveraging most of the work previously done.

### Server side

- An `elixir` based TCP server, probably using the builtin `:gen_tcp` from `erlang`
- Binary encoding/decoding of the game state, subsequently add delta updates as suggested above
- Distributed by default, probably throwing `libcluster` and `horde` to the mix to make it smoother
- Game lobbies, chats, maybe a leaderboard

### Client side

- Adding support to delta encoding/decoding of the game state
- Explore further `raylib`, nicer sprites and possibly animations
- A menu or something to enable a game lobby or hosting a game
- In-game chat support
- Possibly written in `Zig`. Although I can already leverage a C implementation
  it may be a good opportunity to explore a new language, plus Zig has full ABI
  compatibility with C and a nice [Raylib](https://github.com/ryupold/raylib.zig) port

I reckon all of the above, although it doesn't look like that much, is pretty
ambitious and will take some time to be achieved. There will be bugs.

## Roadmap

Coding will happen during free-time and will not necessarily be consistent, I will try to journal
as much as possible, but the high-level roadmap is expected to be something like

- Server - basic TCP server setup
- Server - add support for the binary protocol used to communicate in `battletank`
- Server - add support for game instantiation and distribution across multiple nodes
- Client - some graphical improvements
- Both - delta encoding/decoding of the game state
- Both - extending the protocol to control pre-game logic (lobbies, game hosting etc)
- Both - cherries on top, refinements

I'll try to stick to it by documenting this little journey in short articles,
with the following currently available in various stage of development (some are
to be considered stretch goals)

- [Dogfight! - Elixir server](https://codepr.github.io/posts/dogfight-server-elixir/)
- [Dogfight! - Binary protocol
- _Dogfight! - C and Elixir, testing the server_
- _Dogfight! - Zig, rewriting the client_
- _Dogfight! - Zig, checking Raylib.zig_
- _Dogfight! - Elixir and Zig, game state revamp_
- _Dogfight! - Elixir and Zig, delta state encoding_
- _Dogfight! - Elixir and Zig, hosting a game_
- _Dogfight! - Elixir and Zig, in game chat_

#### References

- [elixir](https://elixir-lang.org/)
- [ncurses](https://invisible-island.net/ncurses/)
- [Raylib](https://www.raylib.com/index.html)
- [select](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/select.2.html)
